---
layout: post
lang: en
title:  "Call for Papers: 16th General Conference of the AIEA"
---
It is our great pleasure to announce you that the 16th General Conference of AIEA (Association Internationale des Études Arméniennes) will take place at the University of Geneva and at the University of Lausanne from **9th to 11th January 2025**. Unfortunately, logistical problems linked to the renovation of buildings at the University of Geneva prevented us from organizing our meeting in September 2024, as announced in the last *Newsletter*.

The Conference welcomes papers on any aspect of Armenology. Twenty minutes will be allotted to each paper followed by ten minutes for discussion. Depending on the number of participants, there will be both plenary sessions and parallel sessions. Invited guests will deliver papers at the plenary sessions. AIEA Conference languages are Armenian, English, French, German, Italian, and Russian. We would like to point out that only AIEA members (in good standing for 2024 and 2025) are admitted as speakers to the conference.

Those wishing to present a paper are kindly invited to fill out [this online application form](https://forms.gle/W5Hs7f8tePoN5xrEA) **before 10 August 2024**.

We can already count on the participation of Prof. Jost Gippert (University of Hamburg), Dr Vahé Torosyan (Deputy Director of the Matenadaran for Academic Affairs), and Dr Suzan Meryem Kalayci (Oxford University).

We are also pleased to inform you that in 2024, the University of Geneva will celebrate the Fiftieth Anniversary of the creation of the *Centre de recherches arménologiques*. Among the activities planned to mark this jubilee, a round table will be organized in the framework of the General Conference to reflect on the current challenges facing Armenian studies, especially in the European academic context.

A PDF version of this Call for Papers with more details [can be downloaded here](https://aiearmeniennes.org/public/AIEA_CG2025_en.pdf).
