---
layout: page
listtitle: Hasan Jalal
title: Hasan Jalal, a great Armenian prince under the Mongols
author: Claude Mutafian
---
*Claude Mutafian (PhD History)*

At the beginning of the 13th century, the kingdom of Armenia, which was
located in Cilicia, was under threat from the powerful Turkish sultanate
of Asia Minor ([Map, fig. 1]{.mark}). In 1220, the Mongols arrived from
Central Asia, invaded the Caucasus in 1236 and ravaged historic Armenia
(KG XXII, p. 239; Baratov 1998, p. 114). Since 1214, Artsakh, a province
of eastern Armenia, had been in the hands of an Armenian prince with
Arabic nicknames -- *Hasan* (handsome) *Jalal* (grandiose) *Dawla*
(wealth), *a great prince, a pious and honest man, an Armenian* (KG LV,
p. 358; Achaṛyan 1946, p. 56/41) -- , nephew of the Zakarid princes
Ivanē and Zakarē, whose date of birth is unknown ([fig. 2]{.mark}). He
resisted their attacks to such an extent that the Mongols offered him
the chance to go to them and seal an alliance, which took the form of
the marriage of his daughter to the son of the Mongol general
Ch'ormaghan. The deal paid off and temporarily lifted the Turkish
threat, although it did not prevent the local tax collectors from
committing atrocities. It was through Hasan Jalal that the Armenian king
Het'um I decided to play his Mongol alliance policy against the Turks.

At the beginning of the long inscription engraved on the inner wall of
the Gandzasar monastery (\>\> Gandzasar) ([fig. 3]{.mark}), which he
built between 1216 and 1238, and which was consecrated in 1240, Hasan is
described as "the legitimate autocrat of the great and high country of
Artsakh" (DHV 82, p. 38; Mutafian 2022, p. 246) ([fig. 4-5]{.mark}). At
the end he gives details of his family, in particular the names of his
father "Vakhtang", his mother "Khorishah", who went to Jerusalem "where
she lived for many years after her husband's death", and his wife
"Mamk'an" (DHV 84, p. 41; Mutafian 2012, p. 316), princess of Siunik
according to another inscription. He is explicitly known to have seven
brothers and sisters. Faced with the Mongol campaigns, he initially
tried to resist, but ended up submitting, like other Armenian lords who
were thus able "to deliver, openly or secretly, many prisoners" (KG
XXXV, p. 284). While the Mongol rulers were kind to their Christian
subjects, the local tax collectors were particularly ruthless. Hasan
made two trips to the East. In 1251, he visited Batu Khan of the Golden
Horde, who confirmed his possession of his domains. In 1255, faced with
the abuses of the local authorities, he undertook a second journey,
documented in the colophon of an Evangeliary copied in Gandzasar in the
13th century (MS Mat. 378: Eganyan et al. 2004, col. 308-309; KG LV, p.
359) on commission from his parents (fol. 308; [fig. 6]{.mark}), where
"Jalal" states (fol. 8v): "I went to the end of the world to King Mangu
Khan and returned home after five years" ([fig. 7]{.mark}) . He then
went to Tabriz, where he learned of the death of his father.

Things took a turn for the worse when, in 1260, the Mongol army suffered
its first defeat in Syria, followed by the advent of the fearsome Mamluk
sultan Baybars. At that time, the Christians of the Caucasus were
burdened with taxes imposed by the Mongol administration. The historian
Kirakos Gandzakets'i recounts in detail (KG LXIII, p. 390-391) the
flight of the King of Georgia the following year and the reprisals of
the Muslim prefect Arghun -- for Islam was in vogue among the Mongols at
the time. He arrested the family of the King of Georgia as well as Hasan
Jalal, who tried in vain to bring Hulagu, Mongka's brother and Mongol
lord of Persia, directly to justice. Arghun reacted by subjecting him to
appalling torture before putting him to death in 1260/61: "Thus died
(\...) this pure and pious man, who had ended his life by keeping his
faith". His son managed to recover his remains, which had been thrown
into a well, and buried him in Gandzasar.

Hasan Jalal also remains, followed by his descendants, as a great
builder, even outside Artsakh, and numerous inscriptions cover the walls
of his monuments.

### Bibliography

Hrach'ia Achaṛyan, *Հայոց անձնանունների բառարան* \[Dictionnary of
Armenian Proper Names\], vol. 3, Yerevan, State University Press, 1946.

Boris Baratov, *Paradise Laid waste: A Journey to Karabakh* \[translated from the Russian\], Moscow: Lingvist, 1998.

DHV = *Դիվան Հայ Վիմագրության* \[Corpus of Armenian Epigraphy\], ed.
Sedrak Barkhudaryan, vol. 5: *Arts'akh*, Yerevan : Academy of Sciences
of Armenia, 1982.

KG = Kirakos Gandzakets'i, \[History of Armenia\], ed. Karapet
Melik'-Ōhanjanyan, Yerevan : Matenadaran, 1961.

Ōnnik Eganean et al., *Մայր Ցուցակ հայերէն ձեռագրաց Մաշտոցի անուան
Մատենադարանի* \[Grand catalogue of the Armenian manuscripts of the
Maštoc' Matenadaran\], vol. 2, Yerevan: Nairi 2004.

Claude Mutafian, *L'Arménie du Levant*, vol. 1, Paris : Les Belles
Lettres, 2012.

Claude Mutafian, *Jérusalem et les Arméniens*, Paris : Les Belles
Lettres, 2022.

### List of illustrations

Fig.1 The Near East in 1220

Fig. 2 The genealogy of Hasan Jalal

Fig. 3 The Gandzasar monastery

Fig. 4 The inscription inside the monastery

Fig. 5 Transcription of the top of the inscription

Fig. 6-7 The colophon of Matenadaran MS 378
