---
layout: page
listtitle: Udi language
title: Udi language
author: Jost Gippert
---
*Jost Gippert (University of Hamburg)*

As a member of the Lezgic branch of the (North-)East Caucasian family,
the language of the Udis, a minority people mostly living in Northern
Azerbaijan, is peculiar in several respects: it is not only the Lezgic
language with the western-most localisation but also the one that can be
proven to be the closest relative (if not direct descendant) of the only
East Caucasian language with a written record from Late Antiquity and
the Middle Ages, namely, the [Albanian language](/artsakh/Alb-lang.html) of the Caucasus.
The name of the Udis (self-designation *udiyux*) is likely to reflect
the name of the antique province of *Ōtēnē*, Armenian *Utikʽ*, which
suggests a migration of the ancestors of the Udis towards the north
across the Kura river \[Gippert et al. 2008, II-95--96\].

The first specimens of the Udi language were published in 1814 in a
short account by the orientalist Julius von Klaproth, who listed a set
of twelve words plus one sentence noted in Latin script; the material
was collected in the village of Vartashen (today Oğuz in the eponymous
district of Azerbaijan, 41°4′23″ N, 47°27′53″ E), which was one of the
two major settlements of Udis until the early 1990s when most of its
inhabitants fled to Armenia, Russia or other states that emerged from
the dissolving Soviet Union \[Schulze/Schulze 2016, 511--514;
Schulze/Gippert 2023, 234--235\]. The Vartashen variety of Udi was also
the basis for the first investigations into the language and text
specimens provided, among others, by the linguist Anton Schiefner (1854
and 1863). An outstanding example of Vartashen Udi was the Russian-based
translation of the four Gospels published (in Cyrillic script) by
Mikhail and Semyon Bezhanov in 1902. The second notable variety of Udi
is the dialect spoken in the village of Nij, ca. 25 km south-east of
Vartashen (in the Qabala district of Azerbaijan, 40°55′48″ N, 47°39′12″
E). In more recent times, this variety has developed to be the main
carrier of attempts to provide the Udi language with a written standard
(in Latin script based upon its Azeri adaptation); a new Bible
translation into Nij Udi is at present being worked out (see
<https://www.udibibliya.com/en/welcome/>).

During the long period of illiterateness after the abandonment of the
[Albanian script](/artsakh/Alb-script.html), the Udi language must have undergone
considerable influences from the dominant language of the region in
question, Azeri, as well as, to a certain extent, Russian. This is
especially true of its lexicon: not only names of tools, materials etc.
but also terms denoting abstract concepts were usually borrowed from
these languages (including Arabic and Persian terms concerning the
Islamic faith in their Azeri disguise), while Albanian mostly used
Middle Iranian and, in the Christian sphere, Georgian, Armenian and
Greek terms for such concepts (see \>\> *Albanian language*). Only very
few of the specific Christian terms of Albanian have survived into
modern Udi, among them the words for "Easter" (Udi *axsibay/axc̣ima* \~
Albanian *axsiba-*/*axc̣iba-*, from Old Georgian *aġvseba-* 'id.', and
Udi *paraski / ṗarasḳi* \~ Albanian *ṗarasḳe* from Georgian
*ṗarasḳev-i*, in its turn reflecting Greek παρασκευή \[Gippert/Schulze
2023, 219\]. In grammar, however, Udi has preserved the most striking
peculiarities of Albanian, which include the abandonment of nominal
class agreement and the introduction of person marking, the use of
"floating" clitics, some irregular conjugation and declension patters
for frequent verbs and nouns, the development of "referentialised" forms
of adjectives and case forms, and the use of datives to indicate both
subjects (of verbs of perception and uncontrolled action) and direct
objects \[Schulze/Gippert 2023, 251--256\]. In contrast to this, the
sound system of modern Udi has undergone notable changes, consisting in
the emergence of pharyngealised vowels (instead of sequences of a
pharyngeal consonant plus a plain vowel) and in the loss of palatalised
consonants \[Gippert et al. 2008, II-12--13; Schulze/Gippert 2023,
249\].

###  Bibliography

Bezhanov, S. & M. (Семенъ & Михаилъ Бежановъ), *Господа нашего Іисуса
Христа Святое Евангеліе отъМатѳея, Марка, Луки и Іоанна на русскомъи
удинскомъ языкахъ* \[*The Holy Gospels of Our Lord Jesus Christ by
Matthew, Mark, Luke and John in the Russian and Udi Languages*\].
Tiflis: Caucasian Educational District 1902 (= *Сборникъ матеріаловъ для
описанія мѣстностей и племенъ Кавказа* \[*Collection of materials for
the description of the localities and tribes of the Caucasus*\] 30
(1902).

<https://books.google.de/books?id=2S5sBgAAQBAJ>;
<https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:СМОМПК_1902_30.pdf>.

Gippert, J. -- Schulze, W., "The Language of the Caucasian Albanians",
in J. Gippert -- J. Dum-Tragut (eds), *Caucasian Albania -- An
International Handbook*, Berlin/Boston: de Gruyter 2023, p. 167--229.
<https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110794687-004>.

Gippert, J., Schulze, W., Aleksidze, Z., Mahé, J.-P., *The Caucasian
Albanian Palimpsests of Mt. Sinai*, vol. 1 (Monumenta Palaeographica
Medii Aevi. Series Ibero-Caucasica 1), Turnhout: Brepols 2008.

Klaproth, J. v. *Beschreibung der russischen Provinzen zwischen dem
Kaspischen und schwarzen Meere*. Berlin: Maurer 1814.
<https://www.digitale-sammlungen.de/de/view/bsb10782876>.

Schiefner, A., "Etwas über die Udiner, ein Volk des Caucasus",
*(Erman's) Archiv für wissenschaftliche Kunde von Russland* 13 (1854),
649-652. <https://gdz.sub.uni-goettingen.de/id/PPN332924793_0013>.

Schiefner, A., *Versuch über die Sprache der Uden* (Mémoires de
l'Académie Impériale des Sciences de St.-Pétersbourg, VII e série VI/8),
St Petersburg: Academy of Sciences 1863.
<https://www.digitale-sammlungen.de/de/view/bsb10522445>.

Schulze, I. & W., *A Handbook of the Minorities of Armenia. A
Sociocultural and Sociolinguistic Survey*, Hamburg: Dr. Kovač 2016.

Schulze, W. -- Gippert, J., "Caucasian Albanian and Modern Udi", in J.
Gippert -- J. Dum-Tragut (eds), *Caucasian Albania -- An International
Handbook*, Berlin -- Boston: de Gruyter 2023, p. 231-260.
<https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110794687-005>.
